# Axiom Profiler 2.0

[Runs online](https://viperproject.github.io/axiom-profiler-2/)

A tool for visualising, analysing and understanding quantifier instantiations made via E-matching in a run of an SMT solver (at present, only [Z3](https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3) has been modified to provide the necessary log files).
The tool takes a log file (which can be generated by Z3 by passing additional command-line options; see below) and presents information visually, primarily using a graph representation of the quantifier instantiations made and their causal connections.
This graph can be filtered and explored in a variety of ways, and detailed explanations of individual quantifier instantiations are assembled and displayed. A range of customisations are available for aiding the presentation and understanding of this information, including explanations of equalities used to justify a quantifier instantiation.

This tool reimplements [Axiom Profiler 1.0](https://github.com/viperproject/axiom-profiler) and aims to eventually add new features while still delivering on 3 improvements:
- OS agnostic (runs in the browser)
- Better performance (about 10x faster parsing)
- Does not crash

More details of the tool's features can be found in the [README](https://github.com/viperproject/axiom-profiler/blob/master/README.md) of the old tool.

> Note: not all features of the old tool are currently implemented: you may still find it useful to use the old tool.

## Obtaining logs from Z3

NOTE: The Axiom Profiler requires at least version 4.8.5 of z3. To build the latest version of z3 from source follow the instructions at https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3.

Run Z3 with two extra command-line options:

    z3 trace=true proof=true ./input.smt2

This will produce a log file called `./z3.log`.
If you want to specify the target filename, you can pass a third option:

    z3 trace=true proof=true trace-file-name=foo.log ./input.smt2

NOTE: if this takes too long, it is possible to run the Axiom Profiler with a prefix of a valid log file - you could potentially kill the z3 process and obtain the corresponding partial log. Some users (especially on Windows) have reported that killing z3 can cause a lot of the file contents to disappear; if you observe this problem, it's recommended to copy the log file before killing the process.

Similarly, if you have a log file which takes too long to load into the Axiom Profiler, hitting Cancel will cause the tool to work with the portion loaded so far.

## Obtaining Z3 logs from various verification tools that use Z3 (feel free to add more)

### Boogie

To obtain a Z3 log with Boogie, use e.g:

    boogie /vcsCores:1 /proverOpt:O:trace=true /proverOpt:O:proof=true ./file.bpl

### Silicon

To obtain a Z3 log with the Viper symbolic execution verifier (Silicon), use e.g:

    silicon --numberOfParallelVerifiers 1 --z3Args "trace=true proof=true" ./file.vpr

If it complains about an unrecognized argument, try escaping the double-quotes. E.g.:

    silicon --numberOfParallelVerifiers 1 --z3Args '"trace=true proof=true"' ./file.vpr
    
on Unix-like systems or:

    silicon --numberOfParallelVerifiers 1 --z3Args """trace=true proof=true""" ./file.vpr

in Windows command prompt.

### Carbon

To obtain a Z3 log with the Viper verification condition generation verifier (Carbon), use e.g:

    carbon --print ./file.bpl ./file.vpr
    boogie /vcsCores:1 /proverOpt:O:trace=true /proverOpt:O:proof=true ./file.bpl

In all cases, the Z3 log should be stored in `./z3.log` (this can also be altered by correspondingly passing z3 the trace-file-name option described above)

### Dafny

See these instructions in Dafny's wiki: [Investigating slow verification performance](https://github.com/dafny-lang/dafny/wiki/Investigating-slow-verification-performance).

### FStar

See these instructions in FStar's wiki: [Profiling Z3 queries](https://github.com/FStarLang/FStar/wiki/Profiling-Z3-queries).
